Introduce CVA to style TwigComponent (#1416)
symfony/ux: src/TwigComponent/doc/index.rst

      My Component!
    </div>

Component with Complex Variants (CVA)
-------------------------------------

> CVA is a concept from the JS words (https://cva.style/docs/getting-started/variants).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
CVA is a concept from the JS world (https://cva.style/docs/getting-started/variants).
```

?

> It's a concepts use by the famous shadcn/ui library (https://ui.shadcn.com).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It's a conceptd used by the famous shadcn/ui library (https://ui.shadcn.com).
```

Reviewer 2: conceptd ?

> This concept allow you to display a component with different variants (color, size, etc.),

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This concept allows you to display a component with different variants (color, size, etc.),
```

to create highly reusable and customizable components.
You can use the cva function to define variants for your component.

> The first argument of the cva function is the base classes, the classes present in all variants. Then the second

Reviewer: This verbiage will need to be updated.

argument is an array of variants.

.. code-block:: html+twig

    {# templates/components/Alert.html.twig #}
    {% props color = 'blue', size = 'md' %}

>      {% set alert = cva('alert ' ~ attributes.render('class'), {
>         color: {
>             blue: 'bg-blue',
>             red: 'bg-red',
>             green: 'bg-green',
>         },
>         size: {
>             sm: 'text-sm',
>             md: 'text-md',
>             lg: 'text-lg',
>         }
>     }) %}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
     {% set alert = cva({
        base: ['alert', attributes.render('class')], {
        color: {
            blue: 'bg-blue',
            red: 'bg-red',
            green: 'bg-green',
        },
        size: {
            sm: 'text-sm',
            md: 'text-md',
            lg: 'text-lg',
        }
    }) %}
```

Author: I made the change so the base now accepts array. But I think is easier if you just use the function apply to append your class.
`cva.apply(cva, attributes.render('class'))`

Reviewer: Yes, I agree, but would base be the place to prepend classes if that's your intention?

Author: Yes this why I added the ability to have list for base, I think your right it can be useful in some situation

Reviewer: But anyway, this matches [cva.style](https://cva.style/docs/api-reference#parameters)

    <div class="{{ alert.apply({color, size}) }}">
         {% block content %}{% endblock %}
    </div>

    {# index.html.twig #}

    <twig:Alert color="red" size="lg">
        <div>My content</div>
    </twig:Alert>
    // class="alert bg-red text-lg"

    <twig:Alert color="green" size="sm">
        <div>My content</div>
    </twig:Alert>
    // class="alert bg-green text-sm"

    <twig:Alert class="flex items-center justify-center">
        <div>My content</div>
    </twig:Alert>
    // class="alert bg-blue text-md flex items-center justify-center"

CVA and Tailwind CSS
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

CVA work perfectly with tailwindcss. The only drawback is you can have class conflicts,
to have a better control you can use this following bundle (
https://github.com/tales-from-a-dev/twig-tailwind-extra
) in addition to the cva function:

.. code-block:: terminal

    $ composer require tales-from-a-dev/twig-tailwind-extra

.. code-block:: html+twig

    {# templates/components/Alert.html.twig #}
    {% props color = 'blue', size = 'md' %}

>      {% set alert = cva('alert ' ~ attributes.render('class'), {
>         color: {
>             blue: 'bg-blue',
>             red: 'bg-red',
>             green: 'bg-green',
>         },
>         size: {
>             sm: 'text-sm',
>             md: 'text-md',
>             lg: 'text-lg',
>         }
>     }) %}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
     {% set alert = cva({
        base: 'alert',
        color: {
            blue: 'bg-blue',
            red: 'bg-red',
            green: 'bg-green',
        },
        size: {
            sm: 'text-sm',
            md: 'text-md',
            lg: 'text-lg',
        }
    }) %}
```

>     <div class="{{ alert.apply({color, size}) ~ ' ' ~ attributes.render('class') | tailwind_merge }}">

Reviewer: Does `tailwind_merge` apply to `attributes.render('class')` only? Either way, it's a bit confusing imo.

What about rendering the class above?

```diff
- {% set alert = cva('alert', {
+ {% set alert = cva('alert ' ~ attributes.render('class'), {
```

Then, here:

```suggestion
    <div class="{{ alert.apply({color, size})|tailwind_merge }}">
```

Author: Yes good idea, it's cleaner! 👍

Reviewer 3: But in this example you can't override anything that is set via variants from outside anymore, right? I mean maybe that is intended, but if you want to allow to override the final look of a component, the outer classes needs to go as 2nd argument to apply, correct?

Reviewer: Can you explain this a bit more? I don't see why you couldn't still set variants from outside

Author: @CMH-Benny I don't think it's changing something. The only difference is now the outside class gonna be in the center of the other class and before the outside class was at the end.

Reviewer 3: Okay, let me try it with an example and how i understand it, I mean in the end this is not a blocker, I just wasn't sure if we should mention the behavior so that devs can do it the way they need it :) 

Let's say we have component:
```twig
{% props theme='primary', size = 'md' %}
{% set button = cva('btn' ~ ' ' ~ attributes.render('class'), {
         theme: {
             primary: 'bg-blue-500',
             secondary: 'bg-gray-400',
             success: 'bg-green-300',
             warning: 'bg-yellow-500',
             danger: 'bg-red-600',
         },
         size: {
             sm: 'p-2',
             md: 'p-4',
             lg: 'p-8',
         }
     },
     compounds: [
         {
             theme: ['danger'],
             size: ['lg'],
             class: 'font-semibold'
         }
     ]
}) %}

<button {{ button.apply({theme, size}, 'some other classes')|tailwind_merge }}>...</button>
```

Now using it somewhere:
```twig
<twig:Button theme="danger" size="sm" class="bg-[#3d3d3d]" />
```

Now, background of that button will still be red and not the custom one - Can be intended, but could also be not intuitive, but since attributes appends classes to base classes, the variant class comes later and probably wins in tailwind_merge over the custom color, or am I wrong here?

Reviewer: Ah yes, thanks for the explanation. This is a indeed a problem when using tailwind_merge.

Reviewer 4: Would this work?

```twig
{% props theme='primary', size = 'md' %}
{% set button = cva('btn', {
         theme: {
             primary: 'bg-blue-500',
             secondary: 'bg-gray-400',
             success: 'bg-green-300',
             warning: 'bg-yellow-500',
             danger: 'bg-red-600',
         },
         size: {
             sm: 'p-2',
             md: 'p-4',
             lg: 'p-8',
         }
     },
     compounds: [
         {
             theme: ['danger'],
             size: ['lg'],
             class: 'font-semibold'
         }
     ]
}) %}

<button class="{{ button.apply({theme, size}, 'some other classes', attributes.render('class'))|tailwind_merge }}">...</button>
```

The `apply()` method would change to allow for an unlimited number of "class" arguments. It's a bit verbose is my only complaint (assuming that this also would work).

I suppose another option could be to allow the `CVA` object be mutated via a `.classes` method at the end

```twig
{% props theme='primary', size = 'md' %}
{% set button = cva('btn', {
     }
    ....
).classes('some other classes', attributes.render('class'))
}) %}
```

Reviewer: > The apply() method would change to allow for an unlimited number of "class" arguments.

I like this!

>     <div class="{{ alert.apply({color, size}) | tailwind_merge }}">

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    <div class="{{ alert.apply([color, size], attributes.render('class')) | tailwind_merge }}">
```

1. Should the first argument for apply be a list and not a hash?
2. This ensures the passed classes are always last - this is the common behaviour, correct?

Examples below should be updated similarly.

Author: It can't be a list because we use the key to find the variant. Do you see what I mean?

Reviewer: Hmm, what does `{color, size}` convert to in php? `['color' => null, 'size' => null]`?

Author: Yes exactly. I didn't know that, but Ryan showed me the trick

Reviewer: Oh wait, `{color, size}` actually converts to `['color' => 'blue', 'size' => 'md']` in the context of the example in the PR description. Am I correct here?

Reviewer 3: Yes, `{color, size}` it basically converts to:

```
{
 color: color,
 size: size
}
```
Similar to JS as far as I understood it, so in the end via resolved values it will turn into
```
{
 'color': 'blue',
 'size': 'md'
}
```

Which becomes `['color' => 'blue', 'size' => 'md']` in PHP

      My Component!
    </div>

> .. __Customize your component:

Reviewer 4: I don't think (?) this needs to be there

CVA (Class variant authority)
-----------------------------

> You can use the cva function to define variants for your component.

Reviewer 4: Class Variant Authority needs a quick explanation and maybe a link. Also if you don't know what CVA is (few will) the header isn't super helpful. Maybe this?

```
Components with Complex Variants (CVA)
```

.. code-block:: html+twig

    {# templates/components/Alert.html.twig #}

>     {% props color = 'blue', size = 'md', class = '' %}

Reviewer 4: What's the point of the `class` prop? Is that necessary or can we just let the normal attributes system handle things if `class` is passed in?

Reviewer 3: I think this is still coming from earler, when there was also a tailwind merge baked in, one could just leave it out and use it as normal attribute. 

But maybe someone puts custom tailwind in "class" attribute of the component and expects they are merged with the ones the component sets based on variants, I guess if that is the goal it's required to make class a prop and then pass it as second argument to apply and then use tw_merge from other bundle to clean up classes before actually rendering it in the class attribute of the element inside of the component :) 

Maybe docs could show both as an example?

     {% set alert = cva('alert', {

>         'color': {

Reviewer 4: Remove the `'` on all of the array keys

            'blue': 'bg-blue',
            'red': 'bg-red',
            'green': 'bg-green',
        },
        'size': {
            'sm': 'text-sm',
            'md': 'text-md',
            'lg': 'text-lg',
        }
    }) %}

    <div {{ attributes.defaults(

>         class: alert.apply({color, size}, class)

Reviewer 4: how do "base classes" work - i.e. classes that will ALWAYS be needed on this component? Would I do something like this?

```twig
class: alert.apply({color, size}, 'the-base-class another-base-class')
```

Or is there a `base` key that's not in the docs yet?

Author: The base class is simply a set of classes present in all variations of your components: for example, for a button, you may want all your variants to contain the class 'btn'. It's the first argument of the cva function. I added some doc for it! Thanks!

Reviewer 3: cva twig functions first parameter are the `base` classes, they are always applied and get combined with the variants - I think having that option is great. It could be done as in your example as well, but what if you also want to ask for additional classes from "outside" (via the `<twig:X class="...">`? 
It could be concatenated with the 2nd parameter of apply() for sure, but the second param of apply is ment as "additional classes"

Base classes are part of CVA and even tho it would be solvable without `base` classes, shouldn't we stick to how CVA works in JS? https://cva.style/docs/api-reference

`defaultVariants` were already left out, because those can be handled by default values in props that are passed as variants, but do we really also want to scratch `base` classes?

    ) }}>
         {% block content %}{% endblock %}
    </div>

    {# index.html.twig #}

    <twig:Alert color="red" size="lg">
        <div>My content</div>
    </twig:Alert>
    // class="alert bg-red text-lg"

    <twig:Alert color="green" size="sm">
        <div>My content</div>
    </twig:Alert>
    // class="alert bg-green text-sm"

    <twig:Alert class="flex items-center justify-center">
        <div>My content</div>
    </twig:Alert>
    // class="alert bg-blue text-md flex items-center justify-center"

CVA and Tailwind
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> CVA work perfectly with tailwindcss. The only drawback is you can have class conflicts,

Reviewer 4: Tailwind CSS

Reviewer 4: Still need to fixing the casing of Tailwind in this sentence :)

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
CVA work perfectly with tailwindcss. The only drawback is that you can have class conflicts.
```

to have a better control you can use this following bundle (
https://github.com/tales-from-a-dev/twig-tailwind-extra
) in addition to the cva function:

.. code-block:: terminal

    $ composer require tales-from-a-dev/twig-tailwind-extra

.. code-block:: html+twig

    {# templates/components/Alert.html.twig #}
    {% props color = 'blue', size = 'md', class = '' %}

     {% set alert = cva('alert', {
        'color': {
            'blue': 'bg-blue',
            'red': 'bg-red',
            'green': 'bg-green',
        },
        'size': {
            'sm': 'text-sm',
            'md': 'text-md',
            'lg': 'text-lg',
        }
    }) %}

    <div {{ attributes.defaults(

>         class: alert.apply({color, size}, class)|tailwind_merge

Reviewer 4: Would this example (and maybe CVA in general) look & work better using Kevin's attribute rendering system? https://github.com/symfony/ux/pull/1442

      My Component!
    </div>

Component with Complex Variants (CVA)

> -------------------------------------

Reviewer 4: Need a `versionadded` for 2.16

> CVA (Class Variant Authority) is a concept from the JS world (https://cva.style/docs/getting-started/variants).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
[CVA (Class Variant Authority)](https://cva.style/docs/getting-started/variants) is a concept from the JavaScript
world and used by the well-known [shadcn/ui](https://ui.shadcn.com).
```

It's a concept used by the famous shadcn/ui library (https://ui.shadcn.com).
CVA allows you to display a component with different variants (color, size, etc.),
to create highly reusable and customizable components.

> You can use the cva function to define variants for your component.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
This is powered by a ``cva()`` Twig function where you define ``base`` classes that should always be present and then different ``variants`` and the corresponding classes:
```

The cva function take as argument an array key-value pairs.
The base key allow you define a set of classes commune to all variants.
In the variants key you define the different variants of your component.

.. code-block:: html+twig

    {# templates/components/Alert.html.twig #}
    {% props color = 'blue', size = 'md' %}

     {% set alert = cva({
        base: 'alert ',
        variants: {
            color: {
                blue: 'bg-blue',
                red: 'bg-red',
                green: 'bg-green',
            },
            size: {
                sm: 'text-sm',
                md: 'text-md',
                lg: 'text-lg',
            }
        }
    }) %}

    <div class="{{ alert.apply({color, size}, attributes.render('class')) }}">
         {% block content %}{% endblock %}
    </div>

> 

Reviewer 4: Break the code blocks into 2 with some text:

Then use the ``color`` and ``size`` variants to select the classes needed:

    {# index.html.twig #}

    <twig:Alert color="red" size="lg">
        <div>My content</div>
    </twig:Alert>
    // class="alert bg-red text-lg"

    <twig:Alert color="green" size="sm">
        <div>My content</div>
    </twig:Alert>
    // class="alert bg-green text-sm"

>     <twig:Alert class="flex items-center justify-center">

Reviewer 4: Show a `color` attribute here so we show that you can pass the variants AND custom classes..

        <div>My content</div>
    </twig:Alert>
    // class="alert bg-blue text-md flex items-center justify-center"

CVA and Tailwind CSS
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

CVA work perfectly with tailwindcss. The only drawback is you can have class conflicts,

> to have a better control you can use this following bundle (

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
To "merge" conflicting classes together and keep only the one you need, use the
``tailwind_merge()` method from [tales-from-a-dev/twig-tailwind-extra](https://github.com/tales-from-a-dev/twig-tailwind-extra)
with the ``cva()`` function:
```

https://github.com/tales-from-a-dev/twig-tailwind-extra
) in addition to the cva function:

.. code-block:: terminal

    $ composer require tales-from-a-dev/twig-tailwind-extra

.. code-block:: html+twig

    {# templates/components/Alert.html.twig #}
    {% props color = 'blue', size = 'md' %}

   {% set alert = cva({

>         base: 'alert ',

Reviewer 4: I think we can just put `// ...` inside the `cva()` function instead of listing `base` and `variants` again.

        variants: {
            color: {
                blue: 'bg-blue',
                red: 'bg-red',
                green: 'bg-green',
            },
            size: {
                sm: 'text-sm',
                md: 'text-md',
                lg: 'text-lg',
            }
        }
    }) %}

    <div class="{{ alert.apply({color, size}, attributes.render('class')) | tailwind_merge }}">
         {% block content %}{% endblock %}
    </div>

> Compounds variants

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Compounds Variants
```

Reviewer 3: *`Compound Variants` or `Compounded Variants` is probably even better?

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> You can define compound variants. A compound variant is a variants that apply

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
A compound variant is a variant that applies
```

when multiple other variant conditions are met.

.. code-block:: html+twig

    {# templates/components/Alert.html.twig #}
    {% props color = 'blue', size = 'md' %}

    {% set alert = cva({
        base: 'alert ',
        variants: {
            color: {
                blue: 'bg-blue',
                red: 'bg-red',
                green: 'bg-green',
            },
            size: {
                sm: 'text-sm',
                md: 'text-md',
                lg: 'text-lg',
            }
        },
        compound: {

>             colors: ['red'],

Reviewer 4: Maybe a comment above this would help describe it - e.g.

```
// if colors=red AND size = (md or lg), add the `font-bold` class
```

            size: ['md', 'lg'],
            class: 'font-bold'
        }
    }) %}

    <div class="{{ alert.apply({color, size}) }}">
         {% block content %}{% endblock %}
    </div>

    {# index.html.twig #}

    <twig:Alert color="red" size="lg">
        <div>My content</div>
    </twig:Alert>
    // class="alert bg-red text-lg font-bold"

    <twig:Alert color="green" size="sm">
        <div>My content</div>
    </twig:Alert>
    // class="alert bg-green text-sm"

    <twig:Alert color="red" size="md">
        <div>My content</div>
    </twig:Alert>
    // class="alert bg-green text-lg font-bold"

> Default variants

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Default Variants
```

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> You can define defaults variants, so if no variants are matching you

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
If no variants match, you can define a default set of classes to apply:
```

can still defined a default set of class to apply.

.. code-block:: html+twig

    {# templates/components/Alert.html.twig #}

>     {% props color = 'blue', size = 'md' %}

Reviewer 4: Do we need `rounded = ''` up here?

And if so, then does `defaultVariants` have limited usage? Not that we should remove it, just clarifying :)

Author: CVA can be use outside of a component this is why we may need it. What do you think ?

    {% set alert = cva({
        base: 'alert ',
        variants: {
            color: {
                blue: 'bg-blue',
                red: 'bg-red',
                green: 'bg-green',
            },
            size: {
                sm: 'text-sm',
                md: 'text-md',
                lg: 'text-lg',
            },
            rounded: {
                sm: 'rounded-sm',
                md: 'rounded-md',
                lg: 'rounded-lg',
            }
        },

>         defaultsVariants: {

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
        defaultVariants: {
```
